# Purpose of sparkify database

  The analytics team of a fictitious startup <b>Sparkify</b> wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app, in order to understand what songs users are listening to. Their data currently resides in JSON logs for user activity and songs. 

### Song Dataset
  The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [MillionSongDataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
>`song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json` <br>
>`song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json`

### Log Dataset
  The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

  The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

  >`log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json`<br>
  >`log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json`

## Schema for Song Play Analysis
  Using the song and log datasets, a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis has been created. This includes the following tables.

<b>Fact Table</b>
  1. songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong <br>
  *songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent*

<b>Dimension Tables</b>
  1. users - users in the app<br>
  *user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level*
  2. songs - songs in music database<br>
  *song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration*
  3. artists - artists in music database<br>
  *artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude*
  4. time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units<br>
  *start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday*

## ETL Pipeline

  The ETL pipeline consists of 3 functions:

  1. `process_song_file(cur, filepath)`:
    *Function to process song file and load song and artist data to database. Takes cursor and filepath as inputs.*
  2. `process_log_file(cur, filepath)`:
    *Function to process log file and load songplay, user and time data  to database. Takes cursor and filepath as inputs.*
  3. `process_data(cur, conn, filepath, func)`:
    *Function to process files and apply function. Takes cursor, connection, filepath and function as inputs*

<b> How to run the project pipeline</b>

    1. Run `create_tables.py` to create the database and tables of stars schema. 
    2. Run `etl.py` to load the star schema with log files
    3. You can view the data and step through the pipeline by using the notebooks `etl.ipynb` and `test.ipynb`. 
    